# Fine Particulate Matter (PM<sub>2.5</sub>)

## Description
PM<sub>2.5</sub> refers to particles in the air whose width are 2.5 microns or less.  Microns (also known as micrometers and abbreviated as μm) are a unit of measure one-millionth the length of a meter.  The width of the largest PM2.5 particles are about a thirtieth the width of a strand of human hair.  Since PM2.5 is so small it is able to enter the lungs and affect respiratory health, especially for people with chronic respiratory conditions.  Particulate matter is linked to asthma attacks, heart attacks, strokes, and early death.  In urban areas, PM2.5 are primarily generated by burning fuels in vehicles and power plants.  Currently, there are two EPA standards for acceptable PM2.5 (to qualify both are averaged over three years):
1.	Annual Average of 12.0 micrograms per cubic meter (μg/m3)
2.	98th Percentile of 24-Hour Averages of 35 micrograms per cubic meter (μg/m3)

The second definition is not entirely straightforward and means that an analyst would line up all the 24-Hour Averages collected during the course of a year from smallest to largest and select the value that is larger than all but the largest 2% of the values.  That process would be repeated for three years in a row.  If the average of those three values exceeded 35 μg/m3 the area would have exceeded the EPA threshold for air quality.
In combination, annual average readings above 12 μg/m3 or daily average readings for at least eight days above 35 μg/m3 would violate the EPA standard for healthy air.
This project is not monitoring over the three-year duration necessary to calculate these values; however, the fine particulate matter data are color coded on the website using a system known as the Air Quality Index (AQI) to make the raw numbers easier to interpret.
The EPA has designed an AQI for five of the main air pollutants regulated under the Clean Air Act.  The AQI is a color-coded index designed to give the public readily understood health information about the outside air quality.  It is an index of how much current air quality conditions are likely to affect someone exposed within a few hours or days.  As an index, the AQI ranges from 0 to 500 regardless of the type of air pollutant, with the value of 100 typically corresponding to the short-term standard the EPA has set to protect public health.  Therefore, values above 100 represent conditions of health concern, while values below are generally considered safe.

## Air Quality Index for PM<sub>2.5</sub>
<table>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td width="30%">AQI Category</td>
        <td width="20%">Index Values</td>
    	<td width="50%">Meaning</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="30%" style="background-color: rgba(0,228,0,0.5);">Good</td>
        <td width="20%">0 - 50</td>
        <td>Air quality is satisfactory and poses little or no health risk.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="30%" style="background-color: rgba(255,255,0,0.5);">Moderate</td>
        <td width="20%">51 - 100</td>
        <td> Air quality is acceptable; however, pollution in this range may pose a moderate health concern for a very small number of individuals. People who are unusually sensitive to ozone or particle pollution may experience respiratory symptoms.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="30%" style="background-color: rgba(255,126,0,0.5);">Unhealthy for Sensitive Groups</td>
        <td width="20%">101 &ndash; 150</td>
        <td>Members of sensitive groups may experience health effects, but the general public is unlikely to be affected. People with heart or lung disease, older adults, and children are considered sensitive and therefore at greater risk.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="30%" style="background-color: rgba(255,0,0,0.5);">Unhealthy</td>
        <td width="20%">151 &ndash; 200</td>
        <td>Everyone may begin to experience health effects. Members of sensitive groups may experience more serious health effects.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="30%" style="background-color: rgba(153,0,76,0.5);">Very Unhealthy</td>
        <td width="20%">201 &ndash; 300</td>
        <td>Everyone may experience more serious health effects.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="30%" style="background-color: rgba(126,0,35,0.5);">Hazardous</td>
        <td width="20%">301 &ndash; 400</td>
        <td>The entire population is even more likely to be affected by serious health effects</td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
